Um, I didn't tune in at the beginning of your live stream.
What I saw that the, I guess the premise of this conversation is, um, that my God
is imaginary did have you already given like, um, Oh, like grounding or a base
for why you think all gods are imaginary?
Or is it, is it just kind of, you're going to fend them off as they come?
It's just your God in particular.
Okay.
God, right.
I could say all gods are imaginary, but I feel like that's an unnecessary burden
because most people believe in a specific God.
And like, if you believe in a deistic God, that's fine.
Like, doesn't, that doesn't change my life.
Doesn't change your life.
Not particularly interesting.
I don't see a reason for a deistic God.
I don't think they solve any actual problems, but, um, like if you believe in
a deistic God, that's really the least of my worries.
Yeah.
Oh, no, I definitely believe in, uh, um, an imminent God, uh, Jesus Christ, the
son of God, my savior, Yahweh, um, happy, very happy to believe in him.
So, yeah, I guess I'll, I'll, I mean, my, my main reasons for believing in him is
that, um, he completely changed my heart and mind when I was not looking to be
changed when I act, I actually was raised by Christians, um, absolutely despised
them, despised Christianity, could not leave church services fast enough.
Um, and I was forced to go to a summer camp for Christian teenagers and was
just sick to my stomach about it.
And I heard a story, uh, the story of Shadrach Meshach and Abednego that I'd
heard a thousand times before.
And God reached in and just convinced me that he is, he, he was a good God.
He is a good God that he actually interacts with those who seek him,
that those young men knew him.
They knew he was good.
They knew he was worthy of worship and obedience.
And I just started talking to him and he changed my life overnight.
Um, my desires changed completely.
Um, and nobody, I wasn't coached on what I had to do or not do when I went home.
Obviously I was raised as a Christian, so I kind of had an idea, but I was
completely settled in my pornography, in my demonic video games.
That was what satisfied me and made me happy.
And I went home and was disgusted with all of those things.
Um, ruined a relationship, a very close relationship of mine coming clean of my
sin, and it's just been a wonderful uphill adventure since then lots of ups and downs.
I wouldn't be honest if I said I've never had doubts, never had, um, questions that
couldn't be answered when I wanted them to be answered, but God is no more
imaginary to me than my wife with whom I have three children.
I could be more easily convinced that my wife and I are just brains in a vat.
Um, then that Jesus Christ is the real and true living God.
And so I realized that's subjective and you can't really probably do much with
that, just as I couldn't argue against something subjective that you would state.
But I would point to, um, significant.
His, what's that?
You already believe that the Bible is true before you're a Christian.
No, no, I did not.
Well, if the reading, the story of Daniel was enough to change your whole outlook on
God, then you must've believed that Daniel was true.
I did at that time.
I did.
I did when I heard it.
The Bible says that faith comes by hearing.
I always thought those stories were rubbish.
Didn't you say that he changed your life before you like believed in him?
I changed my life so that I could believe in him and he changed my life immediately
upon believing in him.
But you did believe in him.
If the story of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego affected you, that means the story had
some truthfulness to you already.
Right.
So do you understand what Christians believe about faith?
Yep.
Okay.
So faith is a gift from God.
Faith is not, faith is not me coming to a text and saying, Oh, that is true.
Therefore I'm going to believe it.
The Bible says that Satan has blinded our eyes so that we don't see.
He stopped our ears so that we don't hear.
And I've heard that story a hundred times and was completely unaffected.
Sure.
Right.
So, um, but the problem is you're suggesting that faith is from God.
How do you know that faith is from God?
Um, well, let's see, I'm trying to think of a way that's not circular.
Well, certainly the Bible says faith is from God.
Um, my experience says faith is from God.
Because I, it just happened to me.
I was not looking for it, but you already believe that the Bible is true.
You like, I mean, you're reading the Bible and you believe that the Bible was true.
Yeah.
I mean, I guess I had some, I was okay with, with the non miraculous stories.
I was only 14 at the time.
I wasn't doing a whole lot of diagnostics of which part of the
Bible were true and which weren't.
Right, right.
Okay.
So you had some belief in the biblical God, even though you didn't follow the
biblical God, then you read the Bible and you read a part that you liked and
you're like, oh, well, maybe this God isn't so bad.
Oh, yeah, that's an understatement, but yeah.
Okay.
So the fact that he saved, you know, Daniel and his friends, I think is a fun story.
Um, I think there's lots of problems with Daniel.
Daniel is probably one of my favorite books of the major prophets.
Um, the problem I have with Daniel is that it just like gets stuff wrong and
it's clearly like, um, says things that are untrue and makes predictions that fail.
Um, so like, for example, it says that, uh, Nebuchadnezzar is the father of
Belshazzar and he's certainly not Nebuchadnezzar is not even related
to Belshazzar in history.
Belshazzar was the son of King Nabonidus who came four kings after Nebuchadnezzar.
And, uh, the problem is the author didn't know this because the author was writing
in the middle of the second century, not during the time of Daniel, which is why
they're very competent with events in the second century.
They get all that stuff, right?
But the author gets the stuff wrong about Daniel's time period because he didn't
live back then because Daniel didn't write it.
Hmm.
Um, so I'm not familiar with this conflict, but I feel like the Greek
Septuagint would prove that statement wrong because that began to be translated
like four or 450 BC and Daniel was certainly in the Greek Septuagint.
So I'm not sure where you're coming up with.
They were, they were writing that in 200 BC.
Well, according to the letter of Aristides, who gives you the narrative of how the
Greek Septuagint came to be, it was only the first five books of Moses that were
translated in Egypt, in Alexandria.
The other books came subsequently much later.
And the book of Daniel, in fact, the parts that are relevant to our discussion,
not only are written in the second century, you know, different parts of
it are written in a form of Hebrew that didn't become popular until the later end
of the second century.
Once they threw off the rule of the Greeks in the, um, uh, revolt from
Judas Maccabeus and they instituted Hebrew as the national language again.
When they did that, when they reinstituted Hebrew as the national
language, it had a lot of hallmarkers that weren't in proper biblical Hebrew anymore.
It's referred to as Mishneic or Hasmonean Hebrew.
And that's the state of the Hebrew text that we find in the majority of the book
of Daniel, a text that mirrors the second century, late second century,
early first century Hebrew.
Okay.
All right.
I I'm ignorant of that process, so I will take your word for it.
There's a good area for me to do some poking around and educate myself.
So I understand how, um, like reading some of the good parts of the Bible.
If you, if you believe in the Bible, reading some of the good parts of the
Bible can really like reinforce your faith.
In fact, the Bible says that, uh, you know, uh, believing comes by hearing
and hearing by the, you know, the reading of the word God, so on and so forth.
But there's a lot of stuff in the Bible that I think would push you in the other
direction.
So Mac brought up earlier, the fact that God allows for slavery seems to be like
a very problematic part of the Bible that people seem like seem to overlook all the time.
Oh yeah.
We, we chatted this one up a little bit.
Uh, unfortunately I couldn't hear your caller cause I'm on my phone.
I guess there's something going on with the, with that technology, but, um, yeah,
I have no problem with the version of slavery that is in the Old Testament.
In fact, I went so far as to say, I would have no problem being a slave under those
circumstances because it was entirely, um, a situation of justice, meaning it was for
the reconciliation of the debts and the repayment of, in many cases like war crimes
or, or just the expense of war.
And so, you know, I heard you talking about, uh, what sounded like a trickery of the
master, giving them a, uh, a wife and children, et cetera.
And then the mass, then the male slave could go out or stay, but you know what, what the
scripture says about the maximum length of time that a slave could serve.
There was no such thing as a perpetual, um, non-voluntary slave.
How much money would you wager on that?
As far as the Hebrews, how much money would you wager on that?
Well, you sound pretty confident.
So I better not wager much to my reading of scripture.
I, I remembered that there's, there's standard was seven years and then there was
the year of Jubilee.
Um, so you could serve a maximum of 50 years, but the, so the, the time of servitude
was based on the indebtedness and the whole concept of kidnapping somebody
to get a slave, the Bible calls for the death penalty for somebody who just took
somebody without cause for a slave.
And so, and, and it's even laid out in Leviticus that the whole congregation was
to be kind of snitches on the masters of slaves, to make them accountable, to
treat their slaves kindly, to not be ruthless masters, that's not in Leviticus.
Oh yeah, it is.
Yeah, it is.
All right, we'll, we'll, we'll get them.
I want to read to you a passage before we get Leviticus.
Uh, for the Hebrews, we'll look at it.
It says, when you buy a male Hebrew slave, he shall serve you for six years.
But in the seventh year, he shall go out a free person without debt.
If he comes in single, he shall go out single.
If he comes in married, his wife shall go out with him.
If his master gives him a wife and she bears some sons or daughters, the wife
of her children, I'm sorry, the wife and her children shall go out alone.
I'm sorry.
Let me read that again.
The wife and her children shall be her masters and he shall go out alone.
There we go.
So according to Exodus, uh, if you are a man and you go into service and the
master gives you a woman to, uh, have children by, have a family by any
children that you have with that woman, they're still permanent slaves.
They didn't, they didn't do any wrong.
They didn't owe any debt.
I don't think that's correct.
I think there's, there were other laws that just made it ipso facto that nobody,
no Hebrew was to be a permanent slave.
Sure.
Find me.
Where are you getting it?
Just, just a second, just because the man went out before the wife and children
does not mean the wife and children would not go out when their time was served.
Well, let me read it again.
Maybe, um, I, you don't see the screen.
You can only hear me talking.
So maybe I'll that that's, that's just because you can't see what I see.
Exodus 21 for if his master gives him a wife and she bears him sons or daughters,
the wife and her children shall be her masters and he shall go out alone.
Okay.
So, so he goes out alone.
Yeah.
Because the, does that, does that necessarily mean that his wife and
children remain slaves for their entire life?
Yes.
That's, that's why he's going out alone.
It was, so you, if you, if I'm serving a jail sentence of nine years and my
years, I'm going to go out alone.
And then at the 10th year, my friend is going to go out.
I still went out alone.
Well, it doesn't say anything about women being going to go out.
Right.
It says that, um, the wife and her children shall be her masters and he shall go
alone and saying, so after the terms of service, after seven years, they're
going to go out alone.
Now, if in fact she's there serving a six year, um, indentured servitude as
well, well, then she would go out before him.
She'd already be released.
Right.
Cause you only serve for six years, but as it turns out, the women didn't
serve for six years, they serve for life.
Verse seven, when a man sells his daughter as a slave, she shall not
go out as the male slaves do.
Right.
So the women and the children are permanent slaves.
Yeah.
I'm, I'm not certain about that interpretation.
Um, I'm pretty sure that that would be basically the idea of purchasing a bride.
Um, I'm not sure how to reconcile that.
It's funny that it says slave and not bride.
Yeah.
Yep.
I will grant you that.
Right.
If it was about purchasing a bride, it would just say a wife.
It'd say Esha.
Yeah.
It says if she does not please her master, who has designated her for
himself, then he shall let her be redeemed.
He shall have.
So there's, there's something going on here besides just like a common
slave because it's designated for himself.
Yeah.
She's like a concubine.
That's a slave, a slave wife.
Okay.
I'm reading a little bit further in the passage just to make sure I'm getting
the context.
Okay.
So in verse 10, it says, if he takes another wife to himself, he shall
not diminish her food or clothing or her marital rights.
I'm aware.
And if he does not do these three things for her, she shall not, she shall
go out for nothing without payment of money, right?
Cause she's a slave life.
Okay.
Yeah.
So I'd, I'd be interested in definitely digging deeper into that, but you
understand that there's a difference between being just a common slave and
a slave wife, not that as a woman, I would want to be either based on how
I'm currently understanding this passage, but it's definitely different than
just you've kidnapped somebody and now the Bible tells you how to treat them.
I didn't say anything about kidnapping.
I'm talking about a woman being sold by her father into concubinage.
Do you think she should have autonomy over these decisions?
Or do you think a man should just be able to sell his daughter?
Yeah.
Well, so there's, there's definitely an authority structure in scripture
as to a woman's ability to like take a vow and the man's ability to either
let the vow go and, and her be held to it or the man being able to override
that bow and say, no, that bow does not apply to you in the book of numbers.
Yeah.
So there's something, yeah, there's something here, but, um, I'm not sure.
I will have to, uh, I'll have to yield on this point until I
can look a little deeper.
Now, God does allow you to kidnap people in Deuteronomy 20 and 21.
Have you read that?
Um, let me go there.
I'm sure that I've read it.
So 20, they go to 20 verse 10 says, when you draw near, uh, to a town
to fight against it, offer it terms of peace.
If it accepts your terms of peace and surrenders you, then all the people
in it shall serve you as forced labor.
If it does not submit to you peacefully, but makes war against you,
then you shall besiege it.
And when the Lord your God gives it into your hand, you shall put all
of the males to the sword.
You may however, take as your booty, the women, children, livestock,
and everything else in the town.
All of it spoil.
You may enjoy the spoil of your enemies, which the Lord your God has given you.
And then in the next chapter, God says, Hey, if you have these women that are
wife, you can go into her.
It sounds, it sounds like kidnapping and concubinage.
I agree with you on that, uh, assessment.
Um, I got to get a better read on this.
What you said, Deuteronomy 20, what was, where was the start?
First of that Deuteronomy 20, 2010, 2010.
So, I mean, my first, my first thought is that Israel, apart from the land of
Canaan, Israel only fought defensive wars.
So in the land of Canaan, they were told to go.
This is talking about towns that are far away from you.
Did Israel ever do that?
Well, I don't know if it, well, according to the narrative, they didn't, but God is
giving you commands here on what to do with towns that are far away from you.
Verse 15 says, thus, you shall treat all of the towns that are very far from you,
which are not towns of the nations here.
Where's 15.
So he's in these towns that are far away from you.
Hey, go and fight against them and offer them terms of peace.
If they don't agree to be your forced labor, then you can, uh, take all of the
males, put them to the sword, commit genocide, kidnap their women and children.
Okay.
Cool.
We've given me three things to think about.
That's certainly something, isn't it?
And then I, you know, since we're already here, since we're already on the
topic and since I don't talk about it enough, personally, I think this passage
gets a lot of airtime, so I don't give it as much airtime, but since we're here,
we should talk about numbers 31 where God allows and commands these little virgin
children to be divvied, divvied up to the war, uh, soldiers, um, after they go to
war against the people group that they were supposed to completely annihilate.
And then they don't annihilate them.
Moses gets mad and says, Eliezer, the priest and all the leaders of the
congregation went to meet them outside of the camp.
Moses became angry with the officers of the army, the commanders of thousands
and the commanders of hundreds who came from the service of war.
Moses said to them, have you allowed the women to live?
These women here on Balaam's advice made the Israelites act treacherously
against the Lord in the affair of Peor so that the plague came among
the congregation of the Lord.
Now, therefore kill every male among the little ones and kill every woman who
has known a man by sleeping with them.
But all the young girls, it literally says children in Hebrew, hataf, all
the, the young girls, little children, girls who have not known a man by
sleeping with them, keep alive for yourselves.
And then later in the chapter, God commands them to distribute these
virgin girls among the soldiers.
Okay.
I apologize.
I'm very slow.
You said numbers 31.
Yeah.
Verse 15 through 18.
Okay.
Ah, okay.
So this is a specific case of the, the Midianites, correct?
Exactly.
Yeah.
So there was a situation in the book of numbers where the Midianite, some of
the Midianite women enticed the Israelites to practice idolatry and this upset God
a whole lot.
Yes.
Okay.
Well, um, I don't have an answer for these right now.
I do have a question about these though.
Um, is it possible?
So in the, in the new Testament, the, the scribes and the Pharisees approached
Christ with some conundrums, one of which is being, uh, questions of divorce.
And Jesus said that divorce was never.
Divorce was, was given to them because of the hardness of their heart.
Yeah.
Matthew 19.
Um, say that again, I think it's in Matthew 19, right?
Oh man.
You're fantastic.
Um, I don't know.
Um, yeah.
But anyway, so, so they were, there have been things, there were things given to
the people of Israel because of their hardness of heart, things that Christ
admitted were in themselves, not good, but it was the best way to corral the
sin of those people at the time.
It was not the ideal, um, but it was given to them because of the
hardness of their heart.
Anyway, is it possible?
I understand what you're saying.
I, it is very common apologetic, right?
But the question I would ask is what does God say about the commands?
Cause God says that these commands are perfect and to follow them forever.
And it sounds like Jesus now is contradicting Yahweh on the role of the
law, and I would add one more thing to that, which is that Jesus is only
referring to divorce here.
Like we know, like according to the New Testament narrative, we know that Jesus
is suggesting that the law on divorce isn't God's ultimate plan, but he didn't
tell us anything about any of the other laws, right?
So you, you're inferring now that because Jesus suggested that the law of divorce
wasn't God's original command, that we can apply that principle to all the laws.
But how do we decide which laws to apply that to and which ones not to?
Yeah.
So that's a good point.
What, where I was trying to get to with that, and I think I was doing a bad
job of getting there was, was to basically say the New Testament presents
us with more of the ideal.
It presents us with freedom for slaves.
It presents us with the complete equality of men, women, slave free,
barbarian, Scythian.
And I think that if it were not for you growing up in a New Testament
effected culture, you would not even bat an eye at these issues of slavery.
If you were to have grown up in India, for instance, just about any
part of the Middle East.
Where does the Bible say that slavery is wrong?
It does not say that slavery is wrong.
So the God clearly says slavery is not wrong.
He says to do it.
And he says to follow the law code forever.
But in the New Testament we're shown.
So the, the law in the Old Testament is to establish what is justice.
What is just raw, raw, unadulterated justice.
So it's just own sight.
And there's a lot of vengeance.
There is a lot of bloodshed in the Old Testament because it's just, it's
justice, God uses the people of Israel to kill people that never did anything
against Israel, but they offend God.
And God was calling for their slavery.
As I said, slavery was primarily for the repayment of debt.
But I don't understand, right.
I don't understand.
Yeah.
I don't understand the context, the historical context of the, um, the bride
of slaves, I don't think, well, yeah, I'm not going to speculate on that, but
anyway, so, so to continue with my point, I think you would not bat an eye if you
had this, these passages of slavery, if you had not been raised in a Christian
culture, it has taken slavery Christians endorsed it, uh, the whole
world endorsed slavery and it was Christians who abolished it.
That's wrong.
Literally the Southern Baptist convention, the largest denomination
in America created itself in order to reinforce segregation and slavery.
Okay.
So you're telling me that all of Christianity must be defined
by the Southern Baptist association.
What I'm saying is that your definition of Christianity, which is anti-slavery
is a tiny fraction of Christianity for the majority of Christian history.
They fought tooth and nail against freeing the slave.
That's why Jefferson Davis gave multiple speeches saying that slavery is the
only method by which the degraded race has been brought to salvation.
That's why the vice president of the Confederacy mentioned that God created,
uh, the, the Negro people to be subservient to the white people so that
they can come to saving grace through what was given through our race over
and over again, we've got quotations from that sentiment found in the Bible.
Is that sentiment that you're quoting?
Is that found in the new Testament?
Where Paul urges Philemon to release the slave and count him his brother.
And where it's known that Christians, the early church were balked at because
they accepted slaves into the congregations and gave them equal rights in the church.
Well, having, having being allowed in the church doesn't make you not a slave.
Correct.
And even the early church fathers, they were considered brothers.
They were considered brothers of the early church.
They weren't considered lesser.
They were still concerned slaves though, possibly under what
circumstances we don't know again.
Like I said, if I was, if I was a prisoner of war, if we went, if we went, uh, to
war with the country that defeated us, I would be happy.
I mean, I would obviously rather that they did to us, what America did to
Europe and just rebuild everything and gift them back everything that was destroyed.
But the reality was that most of the time slavery was a repayment of war debt.
That's not true.
Um, I believe it is, uh, as far as the Hebrew, as far as the
Hebrews, as far as the Hebrews I'm talking about.
It's not the Hebrews didn't go to war with each other.
No, not with each other.
So that's not a slave debt.
And that's why, that's why with each other, they could only serve, they
could only serve seven years.
If you're a male, if you're a foreigner or if you're a woman, you were in there
for life, um, so I mean, according to the code, if you were a foreigner that
went to war with them, didn't say that.
Sure.
It does.
No, it talks all over the place.
about taking care of the foreigner.
They didn't just somebody come knocking on their door and, Oh, here, look,
here's a new slave and they enslave them.
There were specific guidelines about how to treat the foreigner.
Oh, all right.
Well, I guess today's the day you learn Leviticus 25.
All right.
Leviticus 25 says, um, as for the male and female slaves who you may have, it
is from the nations around you that you may acquire male and female slaves.
You may also acquire them from among the aliens residing with you and from their
families.
Now families isn't actually in there.
What, what's the passage again?
I'm sorry.
You said 25.
Yeah, Leviticus 25, 44 through 46.
I'm there.
Cool.
Right.
So it doesn't actually say family in the Hebrew text.
It says from their sons, meaning the children, right?
Says, uh, from their sons that are with you who've been born in your land, they
may be your property.
You may keep them as a possession for your children after you, for them to
inherit his property.
It's easy.
You may treat as slaves.
And so if they had children, their children were born into slavery.
These are perpetual slaves.
Sorry, I'm just trying to catch up.
Yeah, I'm not fast enough.
I'm gonna, uh, I'm going to bog this thing down.
If I try and understand this passage, but this is another good one.
I'm writing these things down, man.
I appreciate, uh, I appreciate learning for sure.
Definitely jot them down.
Uh, they're kind of important and we've got lots of texts from the early church
talking, uh, and even from Pope's talking about how slavery was okay.
Ambrose is probably one of the most famous Ambrose of Milan talked about how
slavery was, was a necessary thing.
Like it was needed.
Yeah.
Well, I'm, I'm Protestant.
So that particular argument doesn't affect me, but fair enough.
Um, you've given it up so far.
Yeah.
So, um, I think like the, the issue of slavery is kind of a big issue.
That's why it comes up so a lot, uh, so much in apologetic circles is because
yeah, I think most people, whether you're a Christian or not, most people
understand like slavery is not good.
It's not a good thing.
And so when we see the God of the Bible, slavery, the funny thing is, the
funny thing is that's not true.
What you just said about most people recognizing slavery is not good.
I'm sorry.
Most people in 2025 America recognize slavery is not good.
I agree.
But you've heard the stats probably more often than I have.
There are more slaves.
There are more people in slavery today than there were ever worded during
the Atlantic slave trade.
Only if you have.
So most of the world does not think that slavery is bad.
Only if you have a very loose idea of what slavery is.
Also not as a percentage.
Yeah, it's certainly not as a percentage.
Okay.
I see.
Just overall number.
Yeah.
Well, yeah, I guess so.
So what is your, what is your particular beef with slavery?
Why, why is that offensive to you?
I know why, I know why I'm troubled by these passages that I can't wrap my
mind around and I know why I'm going to wrestle with them, but why are they
offensive to you?
I don't think that people are property.
Why not?
Because people are people.
Is it okay for people to have pets?
I don't think pets are necessarily property, but also pets are not the
same thing as property.
Like, so when we take in pets, they're become a member of the family.
Uh, I don't think that's the case with a herd of cattle or a herd of chicken.
Cattle aren't chicken.
Right.
But they're animals, they're animals and their property.
I mean, maybe you're a vegan.
I don't know.
I mean, I'm not vegan, but I'm super sympathetic to the vegan position.
I don't believe that our pets are necessary slaves to us.
I think they're family members.
Okay.
I disagree with that, but.
I mean, talk, talk to my cat.
She, she lives better than, than a lot of humans in the planet.
I'm sorry.
He, my dog would be on your side of this argument.
Anyway, obviously cats are on my side.
Dogs are on my side.
Cats are on your side.
Yeah.
Cats are not obedient like dogs, but, but why is the concept of, so
like, like in the animal kingdom and I can't spot any, but there's, there's
lots of, um, examples I've heard of over the years of different animals,
enslaving other animals, um, particularly in like the fish world.
Um, are those examples offensive to you or?
I don't think that fish are necessarily like have the thinking capacity of humans.
I think that's what sets us apart.
Human beings have this incredible sense of, of, uh, morality and also the
ability to logic and reason, whereas a lot of animals don't have the
same level of cognition.
So I wouldn't put on the animals, the same sense of moral responsibility
that I would put on humans.
So would it be okay if I enslaved somebody who is badly mentally damaged?
I think that would be bad.
Yeah.
Who didn't have, who, who, what's that?
Yeah, I think that'd be bad.
That'd be bad.
Okay.
So it's not, it's not our cognition then that you're arguing if, if enslaving
somebody who hardly knows their left foot from their right is also offensive
to you, there must be something else that's offensive to you about slavery.
Thinking you have reasoning capacity, right?
Which means, you know, that, um, owning another human being is, is not
beneficial to the person that you own and treating them like a slave.
What does beneficial have to do with it?
Well, I'm an atheist.
I don't believe that you, I'm assuming that you hold to the survival of the
fittest as to how we got to where we are today.
Survival of the fittest is a mechanism of evolution, not morality.
Well, if, if that mechanism has led to our society, doesn't that automatically
mean it's right and what we ought to go with?
No survival of the fittest is not a moral code.
Survival of the fittest is the ability to survive, not the ability to kill
people that are weaker than you.
Like you can be the fittest in your society and survive and produce
offspring without going back and murdering all those that are not as fit as you.
Right.
But I guess what I'm getting at, I mean, you know what I'm getting at.
We're just, we're trying to parry here, but, um,
I think what you want to do, and if I, if I was in your shoes, Joe, uh, I
think this is about the time I would pivot to the moral argument, which is
basically to say that atheists don't have any morals, we can't have any morals
because we don't believe in an objective moral lawgiver.
Well, I wasn't going there.
I was actually, I think that you do have morals.
I just think that they're screwed up and that you borrow from
Christianity where your morals fail.
What did I borrow?
So I don't see how you could, I don't see how you could say me acting out the
exact same thing that's been going on for millions of years, if you believe in
evolution, just the survival of the fittest, the strong take what they need
from the weak and the strong get stronger and the weak get weaker.
That's not how you could say to me doing that.
It's not, of course it is.
No, it's not.
You don't, you don't.
I own chickens and, um, surround with the fittest is very much at play there in
the chickens, as far as when one of them is slightly sick or down, the others
peck at it and chase it away from the food so that they can get more.
Yeah.
Well, we're talking about human.
Well, so humans evolved completely different than other, than other creatures.
What I'm saying is that human beings have a different mechanism.
Human beings have a higher sense of thinking capacity and we're also
social creatures that survive based on our, our function within our own society.
Right.
So like, I wouldn't hold chicken to the same moral standard as humans.
But according to evolution, atheism, did we not get here to where we are as a
higher thinking people by those same mechanisms that cause a healthy chicken
to peck away an unhealthy chicken?
Um, only partially involved by a completely different
means.
I think it's a combination of factors, right?
So there are a combination of factors that allow us to survive our
environment better than others.
This is what I was saying before is survival.
The fittest doesn't mean that you have to harm those that are not as fit as you
survival of the fittest just means that you are reaping the most benefit from
surviving in the highest level of capacity.
Whereas the person who's not quite so equipped, isn't going to either
reproduce or reproduce enough.
But, but you and I both know that's not how it works in nature.
Um, there's only so many, what's that with humans or animals?
Yeah.
But there's only so many acorns for each squirrel and it's a race to see who can
get enough, right?
I'm just using the analogy of survival of the fittest.
Cause you don't think it, you know, because your moral compass has been
tuned by Christianity, you know, that the survival of the fittest is
actually immoral.
No, I don't believe that it is.
I don't believe the survival of the fittest entails that you have to
degrade those who are not as fit as you.
And Christianity has nothing to do with it.
Christianity says that slavery is okay.
In fact, Christianity, there's always limited resources, always limited
resources.
Christianity enshrines survival of the fittest.
Christianity says that you can enslave people that fall into debt or that
their country loses the war.
Christianity enshrines God's mercy to anybody who will have it regardless
of weakness or strength.
It's definitely not mercy.
It's survival of the fittest.
Slavery is not mercy.
No, I will grant you, I will grant you slavery is not mercy.
Based on the circumstances, it might also not be atrocity.
It might just be raw justice.
Justice.
Again, I got to look at these passages cited for me.
What are the children born into slavery being held to justice for?
Such an excellent question.
I don't know the answer to that.
I don't have to borrow from Christianity.
In fact, secular morals have been fighting against Christianity forever.
Secular morals is what brought you suffrage, whereas Christianity tried to
hold women, women back.
What Christian moral am I borrowing?
You are borrowing, hopefully do unto others as you would have them do unto
you constantly.
That existed way before the Bible.
Okay.
Well, it's in the Bible, so it's a Christian moral.
It's not a Christian moral.
That's a universal principle that almost all societies have recognized.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
Read the Babylonian wisdom literature.
That's garbage.
That's absolute garbage.
Not only is it not garbage, it's in the Babylonian literature, it's in the
Egyptian literature, and it's even in the Stoics.
Read the 47th letter of Seneca.
It's possible that they wrote about it.
I know they wrote about it.
Okay.
Well, good.
They did write about it.
Well, the Jews and the Christians didn't do it either.
The Christians have done it far better than, well, the Jews and the Christians
have done it far better than any other group.
I disagree.
The Christians were the largest segment trying to keep segregation
and slavery in America.
Well, I'm ignorant on that topic, but I know it was Christians who were willing
to kill hundreds of thousands of their fellow countrymen in order to stop slavery.
It was non-Christians.
That was not happening in Arabia, that was not happening in Africa, that was not
happening in Asia, that was happening where Christians were in charge.
They were fighting fellow Christians.
Right, but they were still fighting.
Against Christians.
Yes, in many cases.
And do you know that there were secularists also fighting and deists and people that
weren't Christian fighting for the North?
Oh yeah, I'm sure.
Okay.
So the fact that there weren't Christians that opposed slavery says nothing to
whether or not Christianity abolished slavery.
But it's a strange coincidence that it was two Christian nations that primarily
led the charge to abolish slavery.
They literally did not.
They literally did.
Well, I'm not 12, so I'm not going to go on with this, but yeah, so I guess, I
mean, still just back to the whole idea of morality, I still don't understand why
you're separating the mechanism that brought us to where we are today from a
survival of the fittest.
There are limited resources, the strong need to take those resources because the
weak are just going to waste those resources.
That's not what survival of the fittest is.
That absolutely is.
No, it's not.
Yes, it is.
Most not.
The sickly, runtly chicken or squirrel get pecked and chased away from the
food so the stronger, healthier ones can get it and survive and breed.
We're talking about humans.
I know, but you consider humans to be animals, don't you?
I mean, every living creature that has thinking capacity is technically an animal.
Yeah, so why are you differentiating between humans and chickens?
Because your Dawkins wouldn't differentiate.
He would because we have an intellect that is different from chickens.
We have a higher level of reasoning than chickens have because we have a higher
level of reasoning and rational capacity, we're held to a higher level, a higher
standard to match our level of reasoning ability.
Okay, so I'll make it, I'm trying to boil it down because I'm not a great
communicator.
If one of my healthy chickens sees one of my sickly chickens eating, and that
healthy chicken goes and pecks at the other one so that it runs away and doesn't
feed that day, was that morally wrong or was it morally neutral?
I just told you chickens aren't held to the same moral standards as humans because
they have a different level of thinking and reasoning capacity as we do, which is
why it's silly to ask whether or not chickens are doing things that are
capacity that we do.
We have abstract thinking capacity, which means we're held to a different standard
than chickens.
Who's holding us to a different standard?
We are as human beings.
We have a different level of abstract thinking.
Okay, so what if my two-year-old and my three-year-old did the exact same thing
that my chickens, that I described my chicken doing?
They also have a diminished level of abstract thinking.
Children need to be reared because their brain is not yet developed.
Their brain doesn't fully develop until their late teenage years, early 20s, which
is why we don't let teenagers decide to smoke cigarettes or to join the military
or to own firearms because they have a diminished thinking capacity.
Okay, so is a two-year-old smacking the waffle out of the other child's hand, is
that morally okay?
Because of their diminished capacity or is it still wrong?
It's neither.
It's neither wrong nor okay.
It's a behavior that they haven't have any time to think about it because they
haven't developed the capacity to think on those guidelines.
In fact, there only is morally developed as like a household pet at that point,
maybe less.
Two-year-olds, like the amount of reasoning capacity is like, I need milk
and give me milk, that's it.
Right.
Yeah, I understand that.
I'm just trying to figure out where I feel like you're putting up a wall to
divide what you and I both know is right and wrong from what you claim is neutral.
No, what I'm saying is that entities that have the capacity to reason and think
are held to a higher standard than animals that don't have the capacity to
reason and think.
Why is that the case?
Because it's unrealistic to expect animals to behave in a way that is against
their biological nature.
They're incapable of engaging in the same level of discourse as we are.
So it's unrealistic to expect them to do so.
Okay.
So you're saying that humans should not always give into their more bestial
instincts, that there is a right and wrong that they should do instead of what
their instincts tell them to do.
Yes, we finally got there.
It took us 15, 20 minutes to get there.
We finally arrived at the argument of saying that I don't have any business of
saying what is right and wrong because I don't believe in objective morals and
you do.
So do you want to have that conversation?
No, I want to continue on the conversation.
We're on.
Okay.
I tried to fast forward the conversation.
All right.
No, I'm trying to get more of a baseline.
I'm trying to get more of a baseline because I believe, um, I believe many
atheists have as good or maybe even a better moral compass in some cases.
Sounds like we don't need God then.
Didn't he just say our morals are screwed up?
Um, that's what I heard.
Eight minutes ago.
I did.
Yes.
So I believe that atheists can be good and kind.
Um, and I believe that that is the grace of God.
I don't believe that they, I don't believe that you have any reason from
your worldview to say that my three-year-old should not smack another
three-year-old who has something that my three-year-old wants.
I think I can say that.
Yes.
Okay.
Give it to me.
Because we live in a society where we agree that there are things that are
good and bad for society and for the individual.
And if you teach your children to smack other children and take their toys and
they grow up believing it's okay to abuse other children, and even from a
purely selfish standpoint, you could see why if I have a child, I want
your child to not abuse mine.
And if I want my child to not be abused, then it's in my best benefit to
make sure that we live in a society where children are not encouraged
to abuse each other.
So even from a completely subjective moral framework, I can tell you that
it's not good to allow your child to steal and to abuse another child
simply because it yields negative benefits in the long run for the
individual and for society.
What if that other child is sickly and it's probably going to die in the
next two years and they're just wasting the society's resources?
Which one?
The ones that are being abused?
The one that's being abused, yeah.
Then you're still doing a bad thing because the person or the child that's
doing the abuse is still learning bad behaviors.
Also, the child has no way of knowing that.
What if it's not a bad thing?
What if they're learning the specifics?
You can abuse people who are wasting the group's resources.
Human beings have no way of knowing which human beings are complete waste.
All they have is their limited purview of what a human being is doing.
Oh, I think, I mean, I think we can.
I know several people that just from a physical standpoint, and I know
this is going to be taken the wrong way, but just from a purely physical
Darwinian standpoint, they are a waste of resources.
They're not going to reproduce and they can't contribute anything to society.
Wrong again.
And just because somebody doesn't reproduce, doesn't mean that they
don't contribute to society.
No, I didn't, I didn't say, I didn't say they don't reproduce.
And so they don't contribute.
I said, they don't reproduce or contribute.
How do they not contribute?
They cannot have a job.
They are completely dependent on the government for extensive health care,
all their food, housing, et cetera.
My son is completely nonverbal autistic.
Do you think my son contributes to my life?
Do you think I should off my show?
Is, do you, is that what you think I'm saying?
That's exactly what you're saying.
You're saying children that are born with disabilities that can't actually
contribute financially to society would be better off being abused by children
that could, but as a father of a special needs child, I can say that that's
probably the most horrific thing I've heard in a very long time.
Wow.
So that's why exactly why I said don't take this the weird way because I was
pretty sure you probably would take it the weird out of context way.
I was giving you a hypothetical situation.
I know it was a horrific Darwinian mechanism by which we have arrived at
some and this great peak is rubbish because we know that's not the
Darwinian mechanism as it actually happens.
Yes, it is.
No, it's not.
We got to where we are by random mutation and the culling of weak mutations,
the culling of weak individuals in the animal kingdom and in the human kingdom
is the human kingdom isn't built upon destroying the weak.
In fact, we've got evidence all the way going back to the Neanderthals that
they were helping healing and allowing the injured to live.
We, we do better as a society when society supports even the weakest in
society that makes the society strong.
The society that you're advocating for is not one that is represented
in human history.
Okay.
Then I think, yeah, I don't think that disproves my point.
I think that just, that's, that means that we, we didn't, all of a sudden
the mechanism of evolution suddenly flipped the script at some point.
You just fundamentally misunderstand how survival of the fittest works.
All right.
Explain to me in simple terms that my little brain can comprehend how
survival of the fittest works in, in a group of, well, in a group of chickens.
We're humans, not chickens at all.
How many times we got to do this?
Okay.
But we haven't always been humans.
We are humans now.
Okay.
So how did we, okay.
I'm we're, we're going around in circles cause you don't like this question.
Um, anyway, so back to the whole, a better society is taking care of the weak.
I think it's interesting that Christian killing babies is okay.
Vastly outnumber atheists, agnostics, Hindus, Buddhists in our adoptions, in
our building of hospitals, building of schools.
I have literally no idea if that's true.
I also don't care.
Okay.
You don't care probably because it is true.
Well, I don't care because we don't have the statistics for it.
And it's also irrelevant.
Oh, you get, well, I'm, I'm, I'm valent to do some homework here.
By looking at these passages, you should look up which groups of Americans.
I said, I don't care because it's irrelevant.
It doesn't matter if it's true.
Why is it irrelevant?
You just told us what a good society looks like.
Cause it has nothing to do with whether or not Christianity is true.
Christianity teaches that you shouldn't even have children.
Oh, this is going to be interesting.
Christianity teaches that the end of the world is happening now and you
should do nothing but prepare for that.
That's what Christianity teaches.
So this idea that Christians do hospitals or Christians have bigger
families, these are not things that come from the Bible.
What are you talking about, bro?
Jesus said to be, you should be a eunuch for the gospel.
Paul says that you shouldn't even get married if you're single.
It says, even if you are married, live like you're not.
Yeah.
You, you know that you're taking those horribly out of context.
I'm not read them to you.
Yes, please.
I'm look, I'm less ignorant in this area.
I'm, I'm assure you that you're just as ignorant in this area.
Matthew 19.
We shall see.
We certainly will.
Matthew 19, as soon as he gets through with the nonsense about the divorce, he
is the case of a man with his wife.
Is it better not to marry?
But he said to them, not everyone can accept this teaching, but only those to
whom it is given, for there are eunuchs who have been so for birth and there are
eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by others, and there are eunuchs who have
made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven, let anyone accept
this who can, if that's significantly different from Jesus saying you all
should be eunuchs and not get married.
Eunuchs.
Anyone.
When he says anyone who accepts this, who's part of anyone?
Well, let's back up because it's talking about sexual purity.
When he says anyone who can accept it, who's, who's anyone?
Anyone who can accept it.
Yeah, exactly.
Anyone.
He said anyone who can accept it should do so.
Yeah.
Paul talks about the gift of singleness.
There you go.
Yeah, first truth in seven.
I know they're.
Yep.
Yeah.
And so there are certain people who are not necessarily, are not highly
interested in getting married.
And Paul says that that's advantageous.
Yeah.
If that there are pros and cons to be married and pros and cons of being single.
He says it's better to be single.
Yeah.
If, yep.
He says it's better to be single, but it's, it's a, um, it's a gift.
A gifting that's given by God to a very, very small number of people.
It didn't say very small later goes on this.
So, so Paul later, I mean, I know that you're.
Warping this because Paul possibly in that same book talks about false
teachers and one of the ways to know if false teacher is that they forbid marriage.
Oh, that I'm not talking about forbidding marriage.
I'm saying what is better?
What is better?
Okay.
In fact, in verse 38 in chapter seven, uh, he says, I mean, I'm going to put it
under a, sorry, I keep forgetting that you can't read my screen.
Everybody else can.
First Corinthians seven 38.
So, so then he, who marries his fiance does well and he, who refrains
from marriage will do better.
First Corinthians seven.
And it's well, this passage is definitely talking about just content in all forms.
Contentment in where you are in life.
When the Lord calls you that you don't need to be married, the more you, the
more you talk about the passage without reading it, the more I'm going to cook
you with it.
I'm reading it right now.
It says only let each person lead the life that the Lord has assigned to
him into which God has called.
And this is my rule in all the churches was anyone at the time of this call
already circumcised, let not seek to remove the marks.
He goes on, uh, down where he was called the Lord as a bond servant is a freed
man of the Lord.
Likewise, he was free when called his sponsor of Christ, um, in whatever
condition each was called, let there, let him remain with God.
Not concerning the betrothed.
I have no command from the Lord, but I give judgment as one who by the
Lord's mercy is trustworthy.
I think that in view of the present distress, it is good for a person
remain as he is.
Are you bound to a wife?
Do you, it's, it's very clear what the context is.
He is not saying that we should all become single.
He said it's better to be unmarried.
Yeah.
Because of the, this temporary, this short-term temporary distress that
had come upon the church, it was easier to be mobile.
Your heart wasn't going to be broken.
Um, the apostle Peter was married.
Almost all of the apostles were married.
Keep telling you, the more you talk about this passage without reading it,
the more I'm going to cook you.
Go down to verse 31.
Okay.
And those who deal with the world as though they had no dealings with it for
the present form of this world is passing away.
Paul is suggesting, yeah, Paul is suggesting that the reason why you
should remain unmarried is because the world is quickly about to end.
The same thing he says in first lesson onions, chapter four, the same thing
Jesus says in Matthew 10, 23, Matthew 16, 27, 28 and Matthew 24, 29 through 34.
He says for the present form of this world is passing away.
I want you to be free from anxieties.
The unmarried man is anxious about the things of the Lord, how to
please the Lord, but the married man is anxious about worldly things,
how to please his wife and his interests are divided.
That's why it's better to be unmarried.
Yeah.
So there you go.
So Christianity teaches it's better to be a eunuch for the sake of the gospel
because the world's about to end.
It's a doomsday cult, man.
It's, it's speaking about a present distress.
It doesn't say that.
It says the present form of the world is about to end.
As well as looking at the future.
Yeah, I agree.
Yeah, yeah.
It's, it's both the present thing and the future thing.
No, no one's disagreeing that there aren't present struggles.
We all agree on that.
We know what was happening under, um, you know, Nero and then eventually
Caligula, so on and so forth.
We know that they were under some stress, but Paul is very clear in
Corinthians and Thessalonians that the world's about to end and second
Peter says the same thing.
And the Jewish world did pretty much end in just a few years.
Doesn't say the Jewish world says the world.
Okay.
The world that they were in ended.
He's not talking to Jews.
He's talking to the Corinthian church and he didn't say the world of the Jews.
He says the world.
Well, you got me on that point.
So, so is it a bad thing to tell people to be single?
No, I think if you're a Christian, that's the preferred outcome.
Yeah.
If, if that's, if you can handle that.
I agree.
You can potentially, you can potentially, uh, win more souls to the eternal
kingdom that's not going to pass away.
I agree.
So the nonsense talking about, well, Christians have more babies
and they adopt more kids.
It's all nonsense.
That's not even part of Christianity.
That's just something that religious people do more than non-religious people.
It's not a Christian thing.
It's a religious people thing because religious people have different
convictions and non-religious people.
Well, you got to interpret all things together in the scriptures.
Um, it's clear that the Lord has a high view of marriage in this life.
I still think that Paul is, is just talking about a present struggle that's
here and a huge upheaval in the world to come, and he's just simply talking about
the difficulty that there's going to be for a family man in this, if he's got to
try and care for his wife and children.
Um, it's very similar to when Jesus said, you know, blessed are those women who
don't have any children because of what's about to happen and the Jews definitely.
They suffered.
Uh, they suffered big time there.
And it probably, there were probably lots of women who wished that they had
never had the children that were going to be, um, killed at the hands of the Romans.
Yeah.
So, well, I mean, uh, since I got you on when miles will, um, end on my favorite
topic ever, do you mind if I picked the last topic?
Oh, sure.
I wouldn't make a claim and you're going to think I'm crazy.
And then I'm going to improve my claim to be true.
Okay.
I go for Jesus fulfilled precisely zero messianic prophecies.
Oh, okay.
Yep.
You're right.
I think you're crazy.
There you go.
I already have one more fulfilled properties than Jesus.
Oh yeah.
I get it.
All right.
Want to see a case in point?
Go for it.
Turn in your Bible to Jeremiah 31 for me.
We're going to go down to verses, uh, 15 through 17.
Now, if you remember in Jeremiah, Jeremiah in chapter 25 has already
given the prophecy about how the Israelites are going to be taken captive
in the land of Babylon for 70 years.
And then they're going to come back from the land of Babylon.
Then they're going to be restored.
We find a part of that prophecy in Jeremiah 31 says, thus say at the Lord
of voices heard in Rama, lamentation and bitter weeping.
Rachel is weeping for her children.
She refuses to be comforted for her children because they are no more.
Thus say at the Lord, keep her voice from weeping and your eyes from tears for
there is a reward for your work, says the Lord, they shall come back from
the land of the enemy.
There is hope for your future, says the Lord, your children shall
come back to their own country.
Okay.
Just on face value, what's happening here?
What are you talking about?
Um, I confess I wasn't paying too much attention to what you were reading.
I was busy thinking about why that is not Herod killing, uh, the
children in Bethlehem.
Yeah, go ahead.
Uh, read, uh, 15 in your Bible.
Read 15 through 17 for us.
And this says the Lord of voices heard in Rama, lamentation and bitter weeping.
Rachel is weeping for her children.
She refuses to be comforted for her children because they are no more.
This says the Lord, keep your voice from weeping and your eyes from tears.
And there's a reward for your work declares the Lord nature, come back
from the land of the enemy.
There is hope for your future declares the Lord and your children shall
come back to their own country.
So that prophecy happened.
What, uh, where, where are you going with this?
It happened in five 39 BC.
Okay.
Didn't happen during Jesus' time period.
There's a prophecy about the children of Israel coming back from Babylon.
Did the children of Israel come back from being murdered by Herod?
Nope.
Right.
It says they're going to come back to their own country.
It's clearly a prophecy about the children going captive in Babylon,
just like Jeremiah predicted about 15 times.
So why in the world, when I go to Matthew chapter two, it says that, uh, the
children were murdered in Bethlehem to fulfill the prophecy.
And then it quotes this prophecy.
Why would I take that as being anything but like a crazy ass lie?
Um, well, if you, I'm not sure if you're being honest that you
don't know my perspective.
I do know your perspective.
Okay.
That is that what these prophets wrote was almost always a true immediate
situation.
It was at hand.
Um, and then there was a double profit, a double fulfillment.
So in the case of David in Psalm 22, where he talks about being his hands
pierced, doesn't say pierced, um, uh, I'm pretty sure it says pierced.
Doesn't say pierced.
It's not even a prophecy.
Oh, right.
It's not a prophecy, but I say, well, it is a prophecy.
It's a foretelling.
Not a prophecy.
The scriptures tell us that the, that all these prophets spoke about things that
they did not know what they were talking about.
That's what the New Testament says.
I disagree with that.
They were moved.
Yep.
They were moved by the Lord to speak things that they didn't understand.
And they went back to look and to try and understand what the prophecies
were that the Lord gave them.
And I disagree.
Why would I believe that the prophets had two, why would I believe in dual fulfillment?
Um, because Christ is such a clear, I mean, he is the most bizarre coincidence
imaginable, if there's not double fulfillment of these prophecies.
Oh, not even close.
In fact, I've constructed a whole list of double fulfillment
prophecies that are about me.
And in fact, I've constructed an entire list of double fulfillments and, um,
other fulfillments about my, uh, pet rock, uh, Doug.
It turns out just finding random words on a page.
Does it make it a prophecy?
I have prophecy has to actually be like a clear form of speech where
God says X, Y, and Z is going to happen.
Um, okay.
So what?
Yeah.
So, okay.
So you're setting up the criteria by which God makes prophecies.
Well, God gave us the criteria in Deuteronomy 18.
Okay.
Right.
Uh, God tells you in Deuteronomy-
If he says something that doesn't come to pass.
That's right.
It's something that actually has to come to pass.
That's testable, right?
It can't be a deep, dark hidden mystery that nobody even knows is a prophecy
because it's not couched as a prophecy.
Gotcha.
So we have examples of prophecies being fulfilled immediately.
Mm-hmm.
That the people who heard them had no idea what was even being talked about.
When, uh, I think it was Elijah spoke from the Lord when they were
on besieged by the Babylonians that by this time tomorrow, when they were
starving bread is going to sell for like some really cheap rate.
And it's a prediction that people are like, yeah, yep.
So, you know, it's a-
what he was talking about, but they knew it was a prediction.
Okay.
Right.
Yeah.
And we looking backwards.
They didn't, they didn't understand it looking forward.
They only understood it looking backwards.
Oh, I disagree.
And that's what we do.
No, I disagree entirely.
Is it by this time?
I'll just read it to you.
Hold on.
About this time tomorrow.
Sorry.
Let me put it on the screen for everybody to read it about this time.
Tomorrow.
Uh, a say of the finest flower will sell for a Shekel, uh, and to say as of
barley for a Shekel at the gate of Samaria.
Now, this is a testable prediction.
All you have to do is say, shit, well, today's tomorrow.
Did it come true?
It's a prediction for the future.
Okay.
Gotcha.
Right.
So when, when we get to these, these, uh, non prophecies mentioned by the
new Testament about Jesus, I have no reason to believe that these are like
secret prophecies that were like hidden deep into the text somewhere that like
you didn't know they were a prophecy until someone came along and told you
about it later, can you think of even one prophecy where Jesus fulfilled the
original context of, and keep in mind that if you say Isaiah 53, I will cook
you on that just like I did everything else.
I appreciate the forewarning.
It's a promising.
Yes.
Yes it is.
Um, Isaiah let, let's go to Isaiah 53.
They can't be three, five.
They can never help themselves.
They can never help themselves Mac every time.
Too strong.
All right.
We'll get a little crack and go, thank God my son's asleep.
I'm going to be tired tomorrow.
He's going to wake up at like 7 a.m.
They pay for this one.
Yeah.
I got to be done after Joe.
Uh, yeah, I'm definitely paying.
Okay.
All right.
So Isaiah 53, right?
Well, I'm going to, I'm going to take you.
He was pierced for our transgressions.
He was crushed for our iniquities.
Do you know what context means?
I do know what context means.
Good.
Okay.
Have you read all of Isaiah?
I have.
Oh, it absolutely does.
Oh, he does.
Oh, sure.
Okay.
But Israel, yeah, it absolutely does.
It does tell you who the servant is.
And this is again, this is a place where there is a, a double meaning.
And it's very clear.
I said original context.
Can you find me a prophecy where he fulfilled the original context?
Not a double fulfillment.
The original context of the prophecy.
I'm just talking about the meaning of the text.
No, no, no.
I'm talking about the original context of the prediction, not about a secondary meaning.
Okay.
Is there one prophecy in the Bible where he fulfilled the original context of the
prophecy?
Yes.
All right.
Where is it?
So Isaiah 53, Isaiah 53.
You said it was a dual fulfillment.
Okay.
So I was, I was, I've heard this before where I start reading this and it's about
the servant of Jehovah.
And you say, Oh, but it says that Israel is the servant of Jehovah.
You said it was a dual fulfillment, not me.
You said it, which means if it's a dual fulfillment, that means the original
fulfillment isn't in Jesus.
The secondary fulfillment is in Jesus.
Okay.
So this is a prime, this is a, Christ is the primary fulfillment of this.
So Israel is a secondary fulfillment.
Um, so when you say primary and secondary, I don't mean, no, no.
Israel, Israel is not the Israel is not a primary or a secondary
fulfillment of Isaiah 53.
It's not talking about Israel.
Okay.
Well, let's read some passages.
All right.
Uh, turn to Isaiah 41, starting in Isaiah 52, starting in Isaiah 52.
You're going to need to go back further than 52.
Go to Isaiah 41, eight through nine.
So, yeah.
I'll just keep it in mind.
One through nine.
Keep in mind, I prophesied all of this at the end of this discussion.
Remember I predicted all of this and also fair warning, I've had this
discussion a hundred times, so you're not going to say anything I've never heard.
Not a single word out of your mouth will be something I've never heard before.
Okay.
I know that when I talk to apologists, they always think that they're going to
be the ones to say something original.
You're not, you're not going to be original.
You're going to say every talking point that I know you're about to say.
Isaiah 41, eight through nine, he says, but you Israel, my servant, Jacob, whom
I've chosen the offspring of Abraham, my friend, you, who I took from the
furthest ends of the earth and called from its furthest corners, saying to you
that you are my servant, I have chosen you not cast you off.
Okay.
Um, the servant is Jacob.
Fantastic.
Okay.
Isaiah 43, 10, he says, you're my witnesses, says the Lord and my
servant, whom I have chosen so that you may know and believe in me and
understand that I am he who's a servant.
And Isaiah 43, let's see.
Probably also Israel.
Let's see.
He reformed your Israel.
So we haven't chosen it.
You mean don't believe me.
It's Israel because he says, you're my, yeah, the beginning, he says,
he who created you, oh, Jacob.
So I'm assuming it's still talking to Jacob.
Jacob is Israel.
Right.
Yep.
Okay.
Fantastic.
Jacob is, yeah, Isaiah 43, Israel.
Okay.
Isaiah 41, one through two, but here now, oh, Jacob, my servant and Israel,
whom I have chosen, thus saith the Lord who made you, who formed you in the womb
and will help you do not fear.
Oh, Jacob, my servant.
Who's a servant in 44.
Wait, what, what chapter are you on?
Uh, 44, one and two.
Oh, 44.
44, one, two, Jacob, my servant, Israel, whom I've chosen.
This is the Lord.
Yep.
It's Jacob again.
Cool.
All right.
I formed you, you are my servant.
Oh, Israel, do not forget me.
And so who's a servant here?
That is again, oh, Jacob and Israel.
I'm seeing a pattern.
Isaiah 45, four for the sake of my servant, Jacob and Israel, my chosen.
I call you by your name.
And again, who's the servant here?
That is, is, is, is, is, is Jacob.
Last one.
Now we're getting to the crescendo of the prophecy.
He says, go out from Babylon, flee from Chaldea, declare this with a
shout of joy, right?
Oh, Isaiah 43.
I'm sorry.
48.
Okay.
48, 20.
Well, 43, 48.
Uh, I'm sorry.
Uh, 48, 20.
All right.
I'm good.
Says go out from Babylon, flee from Chaldea, declared this with a shout of
proclaim it, send it forth to the ends of the earth, say the Lord has
redeemed his servant, Jacob.
So we're getting towards the crescendo of second Isaiah, which is God freeing
his people from the Babylonian captivity.
And he says, Hey, go out from Babylon, flee from captivity because the Lord
has redeemed his servant, Jacob.
So again, in 48, it really seems like this prophecy given in second
Isaiah is about Israel, is it not?
Well, yes.
Um, I would say pay very close attention in that last verse you just read and
see who it was who redeemed his servant, Jacob.
Obviously it's Yahweh.
Yahweh is the one who comes with a mighty stretched out arm who releases
them from the Babylonian captivity.
And who does he use to accomplish this person?
What's, what's the name of the Messiah that accomplishes God's will in Isaiah?
Um, is this going to, is this a reference to Cyrus?
You got it.
Yeah.
King Cyrus is the Mashiach who God says I have taken by the right hand.
He is the one who's going to free my people and rebuild my city.
Okay.
Right.
It doesn't say anything about Jesus.
Jesus has nothing to do with this, right?
The suffering servant is the righteous remnant of Israel who had to pay for not
only the sins of the wicked people of Israel, but also the other nations who
took them captive, which is why in chapter 52, you have this narrative leading
down to the nations getting ready to speak in chapter 52, we have the
preparations of the exile and pull it up.
I'll put it on the screen.
Starting in verse 10 says the Lord has bared his holy arm before the eyes of all
the nations and all the ends of their earth sow seed, the salvation of our God.
Now this has been repeated like 10 or 15 times in second Isaiah already.
God has told you that he's revealing his outstretched arm, his mighty hand to
free the Israelites from the Babylonian captivity, which is why the next verse
says depart, depart, go out from there, touch no unclean thing, go out from the
midst of it and purify yourselves.
So in 52, he's suggesting that showing up with his mighty arm before all the
nations is in fact freeing the Israelites from captivity, correct?
No, that sounds right.
Okay.
Now he goes on and in 52, it gets to the part that you're interested in.
It says, see, my servant shall prosper.
He shall be exhausted and lifted up.
He shall be very high.
Just as there were many who were astonished at him.
So Mard was his appearance beyond human semblance and form beyond, beyond that
of mortals, so he shall startle many nations and kings will shut their mouths
because of them for that which had not been told of them, they shall see that
which they had not heard they shall contemplate.
Why would I read this and think that this is about anybody except for
Israel, uh, before all the nations?
Yep.
I, I agree with you that that definitely, it all looks like Israel.
Right.
So the nations.
Great.
Okay.
So I'm with you there.
So we've got the Israel before the nations.
And the last thing that is said is that of the nations that would, which had not
been told to them, they will see because they don't have the prophets and that
which they have not heard, they will contemplate again, because they're not
part of Israelite, uh, congregation.
So they're going to contemplate this thing that they're about to witness,
namely the freeing of the Israelites.
Right.
Is a picture of the Israelites contemplating the thing that they have
just witnessed says who has believed our report and to whom has the
arm of the Lord been revealed?
Well, this is clearly a callback to the prior chapter where it says the arm of
the Lord was revealed to the nations.
Right.
So now we've got a personification of the nations saying, holy shit, who is,
who would believe what we've just witnessed?
Like who would believe this thing?
This nation that came in where they were downtrodden, we thought they were
accursed by God, they came in, they got rescued, they got freed, they got
delivered, who would believe this thing?
This is a personification of the nations saying, holy shit, did
you see what just happened?
Okay.
Right.
So the whole chapter in Isaiah 53 are the nations that had once abused
Israel, coming to terms with the fact that Israel wasn't a forsaken people.
They were in fact, God's holy people and we abused them.
We inflicted pain upon this people.
And in fact, a number of these people were righteous.
In fact, that's why Isaiah 53 talks about how some of them were even,
uh, akin to being a sacrifice for sin, because now that these Israelites are
here and we've abused them so badly, but these were God's people, God's
righteous people, um, the fact that we're now recognizing that Yahweh is
the one true Lord is, is a beautiful metaphor for how they literally died
for us, they literally died so that we can see that Yahweh is the one true
God, which is predicted like 10 times in second Isaiah, like 10 different
times, the prophet tells you that I'm going to vindicate myself when I
glorify the nation of Israel.
You know what I mean?
Okay.
So just help me, help me keep up here in, in verse 13 of chapter 52, who, who
is speaking here, according to what you're just saying, behold, my servant
shall act wisely.
Who is that speaking?
53, you mean?
No, 52, 13.
Oh, sorry, sorry, 52, 13 is the righteous remnant.
No, where it says, behold, my servant shall act wisely.
Who, who is speaking there?
That's the righteous remnant.
Oh, who's speaking?
Oh, I'm sorry.
Sorry.
I apologize.
Uh, the person speaking is, is this is a prophecy being delivered
theoretically through Isaiah or somebody from Isaiah's school, right?
So the servant is Isaiah referring to the nation of Israel, although
from the mouthpiece of God.
Okay.
Right.
So here, here's what I think your first inclination about
Isaiah 53 was right.
Isaiah 53 is primarily about the nation of Israel.
If it's about Jesus, then it's just a secondary fulfillment.
It can't be the original context.
The original context of a second Isaiah is all about the nation of Israel.
In fact, most academic resources will just tell you this outright that
Isaiah 53 is about the nation of Israel.
And they'll even tell you that if it's about Jesus, it's because they'll look
at this secondary fulfillment based on these, uh, really interesting parallels.
All right.
So, so down in verse in Isaiah 53, right?
Who were you proposing?
Uh, 53 verse three.
Oh, what about when it says, when it says, and as one from whom men hid their
faces, he was despised and we esteemed him not.
Who is the, we, who's the, we esteemed him not the nations, the nations.
Okay.
Namely Babylon, where is the, where is the transfer from God's speaking about
my servant shall act wisely to then it's the nations talking.
I'll show you is at the end of 52, go to the last verse in 52.
And so he shall sprinkle many nations.
King shall shut their mouths because of him for that which was not told had not
been told them they see and that which they have not heard, they understand.
And then who has believed what he has heard from us.
Right.
So you're saying this is the, this is beginning where the nations are speaking.
So at the very end of chapter 52, 15, it says that which they had not
heard, they shall contemplate.
So there's a prediction saying that they shall contemplate the thing.
And then the very next verse is a depiction of those nations
contemplating the thing.
Okay.
Right.
Well, before he went on planet like a road, after I browned, he had the
full majesty that we should look at him and beauty that we should desire him.
He was despised and rejected by men, a man of stars and acquainted with grief.
And as one from whom men hid their faces, he was despised and we esteemed him not.
So the nations despised Israel and did not esteem him.
And then surely he, Israel, you would say bore our griefs.
So Israel bore the griefs of the nations and carried their
sorrows is how you read this.
Well, the righteous remnant specifically, and Jeremiah clears this up a little
bit where he likens the righteous remnant of Israel's suffering and the Babylon
in captivity, um, as being like a necessary condition, um, even though
they're technically in captivity for the sins of the unrighteous, uh, Israelites.
Right.
You say we have to suffer alongside of the rest of the Israelites.
Okay.
So continuing on this being the nation speaking, surely he's born our
griefs and carried our sorrows.
Yet we esteemed him stricken, smitten by God and afflicted, but he was
pierced for our transgressions.
He was crushed for our iniquities.
Upon him was the chastisement that brought us peace.
And with his wounds, we are healed.
You're still saying that's the nations talking about Israel.
Yeah.
It's beautiful too.
Okay.
And then the nations are saying, is this still the nations or is this shift in
verse six, I don't think the nation stopped speaking to like verse 10.
Okay.
All we like sheep have gone astray.
We have turned everyone to his own way.
And the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.
So the Lord laid on Israel, the iniquity of the nations around them.
Yeah, that's what you're saying.
That's the beauty of the passage.
He was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth.
Uh, Israel definitely opens mouth anyway, like a lamb has led to the
slaughter and like a sheep that before it shears a silence.
So he opened not his mouth.
My oppression and judgment, he was taken away and as for his generation, who
considered that he was cut off out of the land of the living, stricken for
the transgression of my people.
So who's the my there?
Well, it's the speaker that's personifying the nations.
Um, well, it changes.
It changes from we to my, so, so that's third person to first person.
There's a shift here.
So that happens a lot in Isaiah.
Okay.
That's not nothing, nothing to see her folks.
Nothing to see here.
Stricken for the transgression of my people.
And they made his grave with the wicked and with a rich man in his death.
So we've got a rich man singular.
They made his, they made all of Israel's grave with a rich man.
Although, although he had done no violence and yet, so Isaiah is all
about the violence that was taking place in Israel.
And here it says that he had done no violence.
They're not in Israel.
And I addressed this already.
This is about the righteous remnant, right?
The righteous remnant were the ones suffering alongside of
the unrighteous Israelites.
That's why it says in chapter 40, verse one and two, that they've
received double for their sins.
They've received one lot for the sinful ways of Israel.
They've reserved a second lot or they've been given a second lot for the
captivity and the sins of the nations.
They're not just there paying for their own sins.
They're there to pay for the sins of themselves and for the nation.
Okay.
Right.
And there was no deceit in his mouth yet.
It was the will of the Lord to crush him.
He was put to grief when his soul makes an offering for guilt.
He shall see his offspring.
He shall prolong his days.
The will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.
Out of the anguish of his soul, he shall see and be satisfied.
By his knowledge, shall the righteous one, my servant, make many
to be accounted of righteous.
So who is this his knowledge?
Why is there a distinction here in verse 11?
Because my servant is God's servant, the nation of Israel.
That's why I said the tone or the person speaking shifts in verse 10.
In verse 10, I'm sorry, verse 11, verse 11.
I apologize.
And he shall bear their inequities.
Therefore I will divide him a portion with the many and he shall divide the
spoil with the strong because he poured out his soul to death and was numbered
with the transgressors, yet he bore the sin of many and makes intercession for
the transgressors.
So, so you just, you just do not see Jesus in this passage.
No, I see the nation of Israel.
You only see Jesus because the New Testament tells you it's about Jesus.
I see the nation of Israel because I've read the Old Testament intently many
times and the Old Testament tells you on multiple occasions that after the
Babylonian exile, God is going to restore Israel.
And when he restores Israel, he's going to glorify himself through Israel.
Well, he's, uh, if, if Israel, if this is all speaking about Israel, then maybe
I ought to worship Israel because Israel is able to redeem and able to account
righteous, able to bear iniquities of other people and put them away, able to
um, bear the sin of many, make intercession.
And then even after Israel has perished, they're still able to make intercession
for the transgressors and divide a portion with the many.
Yeah, because the nation of Israel is divine here.
Yeah, because they're certainly not divine.
God is the one who sent them there, right?
But the, the reason why they're able to have offspring and divide the
spoils with the strong is because they're a nation and not a dead individual.
Right.
Uh, they have offspring because they survived the captivity.
You broke up right before you said they have offspring before they, um.
Right.
So they have offspring.
They have offspring because they survived the captivity.
Jesus didn't have any offspring.
Oh, he has lots of offspring.
Zero.
He's got heirs.
He's our, uh, siblings according to New Testament.
Wow.
Well, this has been really cool.
Yeah.
Listen, Joe, I appreciate you coming up and having a decent conversation with me.
I know these are difficult topics and a lot of, a lot of people get up here and
they get a little bit hostile, but you haven't got hostile.
You've been pretty courteous the whole time.
So big W.
Yeah, man.
I, uh, I can say in all sincerity, I love you and I want you to
inherit eternal life with me.
I want you to inherit eternal life too, which is why I want you to turn to Doug.
Well, Doug has not done for me what Jesus has done for me.
So until Doug can transform me overnight from a self-centered monster into someone
who actually cares about other people and righteousness, I'm sticking with Jesus.
All right.
Well, you take Jesus.
I'll take the placebo effect and we'll meet in the middle.
Well, may God bless you with his salvation.
All right.
Have a good one, Joe.